[Music]
good morning how are you it's been great
hasn't it that's been I've been blown
away by the whole thing in fact I'm
leaving
there are being three themes having
there running through the conference
which are rather relevant to what I want
to talk about one is the extraordinary
evidence of human creativity in all of
the presentations that we've had and
then all the people here just the
variety of it in the range of it the
second is that it's put it in a place
where we have no idea what's going to
happen in terms of the future no idea
how this may play out I have an
interesting education actually what I
find is everybody has an interest in
education don't you I find is very
interesting if you did it at a dinner
party and you say you work in education
actually you're not often at dinner
parties frankly a hit for children if
you're working education you're not
asked you know that
and you'll never asked back curiously
that's an exchange me but if you are and
you say to somebody no they say what do
you do and you say you work in education
you can see the blood run from their
face I think oh my god you know by me
it's my one night out all week but if
you ask about their education they pin
you to the wall because it's one of
those things that goes deep with people
am i right
like religion and money and other things
so I have a big interest in education
and I think we all do
we have a huge vested interest in partly
because it's education that's meant to
take us into this future that we can't
grasp if you think of it children
starting school this year will be
retiring in 2065 nobody has a clue
despite all the expertise that's been on
parade for the past four days what the
world would look like in five years time
and yet were meant to be educating them
for it
so the unpredictability I think is
extraordinary and the third part of this
is that we've all agreed nonetheless on
the really extraordinary capacities that
children have their capacities for
innovation
I mean Sirena last night was a Marvel
wasn't she just seeing what she could do
and she's exceptional but I think she's
not so to speak exceptional in the whole
of childhood what you have there is a
person of extraordinary location who
found a talent and my contention is all
kids have tremendous talents and we
squander them pretty ruthlessly so I
want to talk about education and I want
to talk about creativity my contention
is that creativity now is as important
in education as literacy and we should
treat it with the same status
[Music]
that was it I don't think you're on my
say-so 15 minutes left
well I was born no I had a great story
recently I love telling it now of a
little girl who was in a drawing lesson
she was six inches to the back drawing
and the teacher said this little girl
hardly ever paid attention and in this
drawing lesson she did and the teacher
was fascinated she went over to and she
said what are you drawing and the girl
said I'm drawing a picture of God and
the teacher said but nobody knows what
God looks like and the girl said they
will in a minute when
when my son was four in England actually
he was four everywhere to be honest the
main hood honey for being strict about
it wherever he went he was four that
year but he was in the nativity play
remember the story
no his biggest big story Mel Gibson to
the sequel you may have seen another
nativity - but term James got the part
of Joseph which we were thrilled about
we consider this to be one of the lead
parts we had the place crammed full of
agents and t-shirts you know James
Robinson is Joseph we had he didn't have
to speak but the other bit where the
three kings come in now they come in
bearing gifts and they bring gold
frankincense and myrrh this really
happened we're sitting there and they I
think just went out of sequence because
we talked a little boy afterwards and
said you know you okay that they said
yeah why was that wrong they just
switched link it was it anyway the three
boys came in little foils with tea
towels on their heads and they put these
boxes down the first boy said I bring
you gold and the second boy said I bring
you mare and the third boy said Frank
sent this
[Applause]
[Laughter]
what these things have in common is is
that kids will take a chance if they
don't know they'll have a go I'm all
right they're not frightened of being
wrong now I don't mean to say that being
wrong is the same thing as being
creative what we do know is if you're
not prepared to be wrong you'll never
come up with anything original if you're
not prepared to be wrong and by the time
they get to be adults most kids have
lost that capacity they have become
frightened of being wrong and we run our
companies this by the way we stigmatize
mistakes and we're now running national
education systems where mistakes are the
worst thing you can make and the result
is that we are educating people out of
their creative capacities Picasso once
said this he said that all children are
born artists the problem is to remain an
artist as we grow up I believe this
passionately that we don't grow into
creativity we grow out of it or rather
we get educated out it so why is this I
lived in stratford-on-avon until about
five years ago in fact we moved from
Stratford to Los Angeles so you can
imagine what a seamless transition you
know this was from LA actually we lived
in a place called snitterfield just
outside stratford which is where
Shakespeare's father was born are you
struck by a new thought I was you don't
think of Shakespeare having a father
dear do you cause you don't think of
Shakespeare being a child do this
Shakespeare being seven I never thought
of it I mean he was a seven that
somebody was in somebody's English class
wasn't he
[Applause]
how annoying would that be must try
harder being sent to bed by us nano to
Shakespeare go to bed now you know to
William Shakespeare and put the pencil
down and stop speaking like that you
know it's it's it's confusing everybody
anyway we moved from Stratford to Los
Angeles and I just want to say what
about the transition after my son didn't
want to come I've got two kids he's 21
now my daughter's 16 he didn't want to
come to Los Angeles he loved it but he
had a girlfriend in England this was the
love of his life Sarah
he'd known her for a month mind you
they'd had their fourth anniversary
Vince it cuz it's a long time when
you're 16 anyway he was really upset on
the plane he said I'll never find
another girl like Sarah and we were
rather pleased about now frankly because
sousou's the main reason we're leaving
the country
but something strikes you and you move
to America and when you travel around
the world every education system on
earth has the same hierarchy of subjects
everyone does no matter where you go you
think it'll be otherwise but it isn't at
the top are mathematics and languages
then the humanity isn't the bottom of
the Arts everywhere on earth and in
pretty much every system - there's a
hierarchy within the arts art and music
are normally given a higher status in
schools than drama and dance there isn't
an education system on the planet that
teaches dance everyday to children the
way we teach them mathematics why why
not I think this is rather important I
think maths is very important but so is
dance children dance all the time if
they're allowed to we all do we all have
bodies don't we did I miss a meeting I
mean I think trophy what happens is as
children grow up we start to educate
them progressively from the waist up and
then we focus on their heads and
slightly to one side if you were to
visit education as an alien and say
what's it for public education I think
you'd have to conclude if you look at
the output you know who really succeeds
- who does evident they should who gets
all the brownie points you know who the
winners I think it'd have to conclude
the whole purpose of public education
throughout the world is to produce
university professors isn't it
they're the people who come out the top
and I used to be one so then you know
but and I like university professors but
you know we shouldn't held them up as
the the high-water mark of all human
achievement they're just a form of life
yeah another form of life but they're
rather curious and I say this out of
affection for them the summit key
respect professors in my experience not
all of them but typically they live in
their heads they live up there and
slightly to one side they're disembodied
you know in a kind of literal way you
know they they look upon their body as a
form of transport for their heads
you know it's okay it's a way of getting
their head to meetings if you want real
evidence of out-of-body experiences by
the way get yourself along to
residential Conference of senior
academics and pop into the discotheque
on the final night and there you will
see it grown men and women writhing
uncontrollably off the beat waiting to
end so then go home and write a paper
about it now our education system is
predicated on the idea of academic
ability and there's a reason the whole
system was invented around the world
there were no public systems of
Education really before the 19th century
they all came into being to meet the
needs of industrialism so the hierarchy
is rooted on two ideas number one that
the most useful subjects for worker at
the top so you were probably steered
benignly away from things at school when
you're a kid things you liked on the
ground you would never get a job doing
that is that right don't do music you're
not gonna be a musician don't do art you
won't be an artist benign advice now
profoundly mistaken the whole world is
engulfed and revolution and the second
is academic ability which has really
come to dominate our view of
intelligence because the universities
designed the system in their image if
you think of it the whole system of
public education around the world is a
protracted process of university
entrance and the consequence is that
many highly talented brilliant creative
people think they're not because the
thing they were good at at school wasn't
valued or was actually stigmatized and I
think we can't afford to go on that way
in the next thirty years according to
UNESCO more people worldwide will be
graduating through education than since
the beginning of history more people and
it's the combination of all the things
we've talked about technology and its
transformation effect on work and
demography and the huge explosion in
population suddenly degrees aren't worth
anything is naturally when I was a
student if you had a degree you had a
job if you didn't have a job it's
because you didn't want one and I didn't
frankly sir but now kids without with
degrees are often heading home to carry
on playing video games because you need
an MA where the previous job required a
BA and now you need a PhD for the other
it's a process of academic inflation and
it indicates the whole structure of
Education is shifting beneath our feet
we need to radically rethink our view of
intelligence we know three things about
intelligence one its diverse we think
about the world in all the ways that we
experience it we think visually we think
in sound we think kinesthetically we
think in abstract terms we think in
movement secondly intelligence is
dynamic if you look at the interactions
of a human brain as we heard yesterday
from number of presentations
intelligence is wonderfully interactive
the brain isn't divided into
compartments in fact creativity which I
define as the process of having original
ideas that have value more often than
not comes about through the interaction
of different disciplinary ways of saying
things the brain it's intentioned by the
way there's a shaft of nerves that joins
the two hours the brain called the
corpus callosum it's thicket in women
following from Helen yesterday I think
this is probably why women are better at
multitasking because you are aren't you
that's a raft of research but I know if
my personal life if my wife is cooking a
meal at home which is not often
thankfully but you know if she's
no she's good at something but if she's
cooking you know she is dealing with
people on the phone she's talking the
kids she's painting the ceiling you know
she's doing open-heart surgery over here
if I'm cooking the door is shut
the kids are out the phones on the hook
if she comes in I get annoyed
I said Terry please I'm trying to fry an
egg in here you know
give
give me a break okay there was a general
philosophical thing if a tree falls in a
forest and nobody hears it did it happen
no that old chestnut I saw a great
t-shirt really recently would said if a
man speaks his mind in a forest and no
woman hears him is he still wrong and
the third thing about intelligence is
its distinct I'm doing a new book at the
moment called Epiphany which is based on
a series of interviews with people about
how they discovered their talent and
fascinated by how people got to be there
it's really prompted by a conversation I
had with a wonderful woman who make most
people never heard of called Gillian
Lynne have you heard of her some have
she's a choreographer and everybody
knows her work she did cats and Phantom
the Opera she's wonderful I used to be
on the board of the Royal Ballet in
England as you can see and anyway Jonah
had lunch one day I said how'd you got
to be a dancer
and she said it was interesting when she
was at school she was really hopeless
and the school in the 30s wrote to her
parents said we think Gillian has a
learning disorder you couldn't
concentrate she was fidgeting I think
now they'd say she had ADHD would new
but this was the 1930s and ADHD hadn't
been invented you know at this point so
it wasn't an available condition
you know people people
people weren't aware they could have
that anyway she sent went to see this
this specialist said this oak-paneled
room and and she was there with with her
mother and she was led and sat on this
chair at the end and she sat on her
hands for 20 minutes while this man
talked a mother about all the problems
Gillian was having at school and at the
end of it because she was disturbing
people that homework was always late and
so on little kid of a in the end the the
doctor went and sat next Gillian said
Gillian I've listened to all these
things that mothers told me I need to
speak to her privately so she said she
said wait here we'll be back we won't be
very long and and and they went and left
her but as they went out the room he
turned on the radio that was sitting on
his desk and when they got out of the
room he said to mother just stand and
watch him and the minute they left the
room she said she was on their feet
moving to the music and they watched a
few minutes and he turned to her mother
and he said you know mrs. Lynne Gillian
isn't sick she's a dancer take her to a
dance school I said what happened said
she did I can't tell you sir how
wonderful it was we walked in this room
and it was full of people like me people
who couldn't sit still people who had to
move to think who had to move to think
that it ballet that a tap
that had jazz they did modern day
contemporary she was eventually
auditioned for the Royal Ballet School
she became a soloist she had a wonderful
career at the Royal Ballet she
eventually graduate from the Royal
Ballet School found her own company the
Gillian Lynne Dance Company met Andrew
Lloyd Webber she's been responsible some
of those successful musical theater
actions in history she's given pleasure
to millions and she's a multimillionaire
somebody else might have put on
medication and told her to calm down now
I think
[Music]
[Applause]
what I think it comes to this Al Gore
spoke the other night about ecology and
the revolution that was triggered by
Rachel Carson I believe our only hope
for the future is to adopt a new
conception of human ecology one in which
we start to reconstitute our conception
of the richness of human capacity our
education system has mined our minds in
the way that we strip-mine the earth for
a particular commodity and for the
future it won't serve us we have to
rethink the fundamental principles on
which were educating our children there
was a wonderful quote by Jonas Salk who
said if you were to if all the insects
were to disappear from the earth that
within 50 years all life on earth would
end if all human beings disappeared from
the earth within 50 years all forms of
life would flourish and he's right what
Ted celebrates is the gift of the human
imagination we have to be careful now
that we use this gift wisely and that we
avert some of the scenarios that we've
talked about and the only way we'll do
it is by seeing our creative capacities
for the richness they are and seeing our
children for the hope that they are and
our task is to educate their whole being
so they can face this future by the way
we may not see this future but they will
and our job is to help them make
something of it thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]
what if great ideas weren't cherished
what if they carried no importance or
held no value there is a place where
artistic vision is protected where
inspired design ideas live on to become
ultimate driving machines
[Music]
you